ARROW-17907: [Website] Arbitrarily Nested Data in Parquet and Arrow: Part 3: Encoding Arbitrary Structs of Lists, Lists of Structs (#247)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2022-10-17-arrow-parquet-encoding-part-3.md

---
layout: post
title: "Arrow and Parquet Part 3: Arbitrary Nesting with Lists of Structs and Structs of Lists"

> date: "2022-10-07 00:00:00"

Author: ```suggestion
date: "2022-10-17 00:00:00"
```

(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

## Introduction

This is the third of a three part series exploring how projects such as [Rust Apache Arrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow-rs) support conversion between [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) for in memory processing and [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) for efficient storage. [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/) is an open, language-independent columnar memory format for flat and hierarchical data, organized for efficient analytic operations. [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) is an open, column-oriented data file format designed for very efficient data encoding and retrieval.

> [Arrow and Parquet Part 1: Primitive Types and Nullability](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/05/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-1/) covers the basics of primitive types.  [Arrow and Parquet Part 2: Nested and Hierarchical Data using Structs and Lists](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/08/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-2/) covers the `Struct` and `List` types,  and now this post gives an example of how both formats combine the topics to support arbitrary nesting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Arrow and Parquet Part 1: Primitive Types and Nullability](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/05/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-1/) covered the basics of primitive types.  [Arrow and Parquet Part 2: Nested and Hierarchical Data using Structs and Lists](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/08/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-2/) covered the `Struct` and `List` types. This post builds on this foundation to show how both formats combine these to support arbitrary nesting.
```

  “a”: [1],           <-- top-level field a containing list of integers
  “b”: [              <-- top-level field b containing list of structures
    {                 <-- list element of b containing two field b1 and b2
      “b1”: 1         <-- b1 is always provided (non nullable)
    },
    {
      “b1”: 1,
      “b2”: [         <-- b2 contains list of integers
        3, 4          <-- list elements of b.b2 always provided (non nullable)
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

```json
{
  “b”: [              <-- b is always provided (non nullable)
    {
      “b1”: 2
    },
  ]
}
```

```json
{
  “a”: [null, null],  <-- list elements of a are nullable
  “b”: [null]         <-- list elements of b are nullable
}
```

Documents of this format could be stored in this Arrow schema

```text
Field(name: “a”, nullable: true, datatype: List(
  Field(name: “element”, nullable: true, datatype: Int32),
)
Field(name: “b”), nullable: false, datatype: List(
  Field(name: “element”, nullable: true, datatype: Struct[
    Field(name: “b1”, nullable: false, datatype: Int32),
    Field(name: “b2”, nullable: true, datatype: List(
      Field(name: “element”, nullable: false, datatype: Int32)
    ))
  ])
))
```

> As explained previously, Arrow chooses to represent this in a hierarchical fashion.  `StructArray`s are stored as child arrays that contain each field of the struct.  `ListArray`s are stored as lists of monotonically increasing integers called offsets, and values are stored in a single child array. Each consecutive pair of elements in the offset array identifies a slice of the child array for that array index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As explained previously, Arrow chooses to represent this in a hierarchical fashion. `StructArray`s are stored as child arrays that contain each field of the struct.  `ListArray`s are stored as lists of monotonically increasing integers called offsets, with values stored in a single child array. Each consecutive pair of elements in the offset array identifies a slice of the child array for that array index.
```

│                    │          │ │Validity         │ child[0] │
           │         │ "b1"     │           Offsets │ Primitive│ │ │ │
│                    │ Primitive│ │ "b2"            │ Array    │
           │         │ Array    │   ListArray       └──────────┘ │ │ │
│                    └──────────┘ └ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─
           │ "element"                                             │ │
│            StructArray
  "b"      └ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘ │
│ ListArray
 ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ─ ┘
```

Documents of this format could be stored in this Parquet schema

```text
message schema {
  optional group a (LIST) {
    repeated group list {
      optional int32 element;
    }
  }
  required group b (LIST) {
    repeated group list {
      optional group element {
        required int32 b1;
        optional group b2 (LIST) {
          repeated group list {
            required int32 element;
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

As explained in our previous posts, Parquet uses repetition levels and definition levels to encode nested structures and nullability.

> Definition and repetition levels is a non trivial topic. For more detail, you can read the [Google Dremel Paper](https://research.google/pubs/pub36632/) which is typically cited as the inspiration for Parquet repetition and definition levels, and offers an academic description of the algorithm. You can also explore this [gist](https://gist.github.com/alamb/acd653c49e318ff70672b61325ba3443) to see Rust [parquet](https://crates.io/crates/parquet) code which generates the example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Definition and repetition levels is a non trivial topic. For more detail, you can read the [Google Dremel Paper](https://research.google/pubs/pub36632/) which offers an academic description of the algorithm. You can also explore this [gist](https://gist.github.com/alamb/acd653c49e318ff70672b61325ba3443) to see Rust [parquet](https://crates.io/crates/parquet) code which generates the example below.
```

Parquet explicitly uses dremel encoding
